---
layout: portfolio
title: About William
---

<span class='textsc'>William A. Ellison</span> is a software developer
and medical billing expert living in the Knoxville, Tennessee, area in
the southeastern United States.  Mr. Ellison is currently employed in
the healthcare billing sector, working for a revenue cycle management
office.  His background in medical coding and software development
informs his data-driven, analytical approach to solving problems.

William is fueled by his twin passions of medicine and software
development.  He subscribes to the idea of <em>kaizen</em> -- continuous
improvement -- and considers himself a &ldquo;forever student,&rdquo;
eager to build upon his academic foundations in computer science and his
specific vocational training in revenue cycle management, Agile
development, and developing for the modern cloud.  Mr. Ellison stays in
tune with the industry with personal projects, continuing education, and
professional development.  Among his goals is to attend graduate school
for software engineering.

William's hunger for knowledge and his determination to unleash his
analytical mind has seen him climbing the ladder at the University
Physicians' Association, transitioning from charge capture to accounts
receivable within his first eighteen months in the industry.  He became
a Certified Professional Coder&trade; in December 2019 and uses the
knowledge gained from this certification every day in resolving claim
denials and writing dispute letters.

<blockquote>
    <p>
        [William] regularly demonstrates a strong understanding of even the most
        complex coding concepts.  He is a tremendous asset to our team.
    </p>
    <footer class="blockquote-footer">
        &mdash; <cite>A former supervisor</cite>
    </footer>
</blockquote>

William regularly receives strong performance reviews from his
superiors, who note his strong understanding and knowledge of coding and
billing concepts as they pertain to complex surgical claims, as well as
his strongly detailed style when logging his work and notating accounts
he has worked.  He is currently part of a cross-functional team of
associates that has reduced the outstanding claim volume of a vascular
surgery practice by more than 40% over the past six months and resolving
hundreds of thousands of dollars' worth of claims.

In 2021, William decided to begin revisiting his first love, enrolling
in a software development boot camp targeted at developing server-side
Web applications using the Python programming language.  William's
greatest desire as a technologist is to combine his interest in medicine
and his knowledge of medical coding and the broader revenue cycle with
his passion for programming. His goal is to work to build the next
generation of practice management and electronic health records
software.

William is interested in moving into the software development space and
refining his skills as a Python developer and as a backend Web developer
more broadly.  Send email to <waellison@gmail.com> to connect with him
or join his network [on LinkedIn][li].  Check out his code [on
GitHub][gh] as well.

[li]: https://linkedin.com/in/tnwae
[gh]: https://github.com/waellison
