---
layout: portfolio
title: "Colophon"
description: "How tnwae.us was made, from server to surfer and from film grains to written posts. (Photo: tnwae.us)"
permalink: "/colophon/"
image: "//assets.marshproject.org/heroes/ideapad-keyboard.jpg"
---

This site is written and produced by W. Anthony Ellison.  I do my own ~~stunts~~ code and take my own photos (for the most part).  Photos not mine are attributed where they lie, unless their usage terms permit me to get away with ~~being lazy~~ not doing so.

## Type

This site is set using _Cormorant Garamond_ by Christian Thalmann.  Monospaced text is set in _Source Code Pro_ by Adobe.

The tnwae.us logo, a lowercase `a` in a box, is generated by using a Unicode combining enclosing square, codepoint `0x20de`, like so: <span class='chain-bold chain-italic chain-offset-left'>a&#x20de;</span>  &nbsp;&nbsp;I chose this logo because I am terrible at design and admire the elegance of something that can be expressed in pure Unicode.  This is also used as a typographical flourish elsewhere on the site, specifically as an end mark for all articles.

Icons originate from _Font Awesome_ by Dave Gandy and contributors.  I have subsetted this face via the Fontello service.

## Tools

I pretty much exclusively use Intel-based computers, although there are a few non-x86 boxes in the mix as well.  My main laptop is a Lenovo IdeaPad P400 Touch, which in 2013 was the cheapest quad-core (Core i7-3632QM FTW) laptop I could find.  I've since upgraded it with an optical drive bay adapter, two solid-state drives, maximum RAM (16 GB), and more.

My main desktop is a 2009-vintage Intel X58-based ex-gaming PC.  It rocks a hexa-core Xeon X5650 and 24 GB of RAM for those demanding virtual machine runs.  The system is cooled with two integrated closed-loop water cooling systems and runs an old Nvidia GeForce GTX 660 Ti video card.

Here at Marsh HQ, I also run an old Sandy Bridge Mini-ITX machine as a file server.  It features a 2 TB hard drive, a Gigabit Ethernet connection, and little else.

I also have a Nextbook tablet, which uses a Bay Trail SoC and runs Windows.  In my pocket, I carry an old Nintendo 3DS XL and a Samsung Galaxy S5 Active phone.

All of my x86 PCs run either Windows 10 or Debian Linux.  My Macs, all of which are PowerPC, run either OS X, OS 9.2.2, or OS 8.6.  My sole 68k Mac, a Macintosh Classic from 1990, runs System 6.

For more information about my computers, hit up <http://machineroom.tnwae.us>.

## Server Software

`tnwae.us` is hosted on a Linode virtual private server with the rest of
the [Marsh Project][marsh].  Marsh Project uses Debian 8 and nginx to serve its
websites.

[marsh]: http://marshproject.org

## Production Notes

I write articles, templates, and other parts of `tnwae.us` locally.  I test for proper rendering performance in Firefox and Chrome, which nowadays is usually enough.  With huge changes, I'll also test in Edge and IE 11, both under Windows 10.  When it's time for a post to go live, I push the changes to `tnwae.us` using `rsync`.

My Jekyll environment:

* Markdown: RDiscount
* Highlighting: Rouge
* Asset pipeline: External through Gulp.js
* Templates: Haml compiled to HTML via Gulp
* Scripts: CoffeeScript compiled by Gulp
* Stylesheets: Sass compiled by Gulp

I used to build Haml templates through Jekyll, but the `jekyll-haml` gem broke when Jekyll 3.0 hit.  So I could update to Jekyll 3.0, I migrated my entire asset pipeline, such as it is, into Gulp.js.

I wrote the template myself, but it was, at least initially, largely based on the default Jekyll template from the old 1.x branch.  Post text is written in Markdown.

I'm using Bootstrap, Bourbon, and _The Chain_ atop Bootstrap and Bourbon.  I plan on migrating from Bootstrap to Neat and Bitters in short order.

### Web standards

Web standards are vitally important.  If this site looks like crap in your
chosen browser, choose a different browser.
