---
title: "2,557 days"
layout: post
description: "I celebrate my seventh anniversary of being a Linux user.  Has it really been so long?"
---
2,557 days ago (that's seven years), I did two things that changed my life forever.  I moved into college at the University of Tennessee, where I'd end up stumbling into computer science, the discipline that I love.  I also, more importantly, had access to fat pipes for the first time and took advantage by pointing my browser at <http://debian.org>, which is a website that houses one of my favorite pieces of software ever made.  I downloaded a networked installation ISO of the `testing` version, burned it to a CD, and after a small stumbling block, I made my way into the wide world of Linux.

I tried Ubuntu 6.06 later that year, and while I preferred Debian, I would keep Ubuntu filed away in the back of my mind and shift to using it full-time or part-time throughout my education.  I would try Fedora in 2007 and Mint in 2010, briefly trying Gentoo in 2012 and all the while thinking about trying other distros still.  I've stayed true to my Linux roots, though, using Debian-based (and more recently Ubuntu-based) distros.  Nowadays, I use Ubuntu on my development server (a crufty old Dell Optiplex) and main laptop (my well-loved, and well-worn, ThinkPad), and I run Mint on my desktop workstation.  Plain Debian still works, however, and it's a fine system -- indeed, I switched from Windows 7 to it on my ThinkPad when I realized that $199 was just too much to put Windows 8 on the laptop.

What Linux does for people is expose them to the realization that there's another way of doing things, another conception of how a computer can operate.  For the hardcore tweaker, you can customize everything down to the kernel and boot loader, and for the serious tinkerer, you can take it all apart and see how it works. Linux has astounding value as an educational operating system too, since it enables students to see, and feel, how an OS goes together from the ground up. What's more, you can read the source code that makes it possible, from the Linux kernel to the X Window System to the Chromium web browser.  You can hack on any kind of code from plain C and C++ to advanced languages like Prolog, Erlang, Haskell, and Scheme, and you can follow along with x86 assembly programming or the MIT Scheme used in <abbr title="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs">SICP</abbr>.  The Macintosh may provide value to software people, but Linux is programming nirvana: open to the core and ready for modifications.

The user experience has only gotten better since 2006, too.  The GNOME and KDE environments I cut my teeth on have now transformed into totally different work environments, and the old versions live on as forked projects.  Where once there was just GNOME vs KDE vs XFCE, now there are:

* GNOME (version 3)
* Unity (shell for GNOME 3, by and for Ubuntu)
* MATE (forked from GNOME version 2)
* KDE (version 4)
* Trinity (forked from KDE version 3.5)
* Cinnamon (created for Linux Mint)
* LXDE
* XFCE

That's to say nothing of the alternative window managers out there, like Fluxbox, Openbox, `xmonad`, `ratpoison`, WindowMaker, FVWM, and so on.  (I've used every environment listed here and above excepting Cinnamon.  I still insist that GNOME 2, aka MATE, gets it the most right of any environment out there outside of the command line.)  I love the unobtrusiveness of the command line, the unpretentiousness of MATE, and the simple ease of recent versions of Unity.  Linux is the ur-OS, the embodiment of parsimonious computing, and a revelation in how much one can do with basically nothing.  I've run Linux on everything from a quad-core gaming box with 6 GB of RAM (back when that was still a big number) to a boat-anchor iMac with just 160 MB of RAM and less processing power than my first computer.  It works for supercomputers, smartphones, and everything between.

Linux is the perfect operating system, and I am a lifelong believer.
