---
title: 'The Me(-Me-Me) generation: lazy &#038; entitled?'
layout: post
description: "I lay into alleged journalist Joel Stein's assessment of my generation.  Fun fact: I have ThinkProgress to thank for buying a Time subscription."
---
I don't think Joel Stein has ever *met* a true Millennial.  He's surely met the idealized depiction of one, a navel-gazing waste of oxygen obsessed with Instagram and Twitter and Facebook, someone too busy being fabulous to care about anything "important."  I'm sure he's also met the ones disdainful of suits and ties, and the ones busy waiting tables at Olive Garden to scrape together enough pennies to keep the student lenders off their backs.

Stein got one thing right, though, in the 20 May 2013 issue of *Time*: ours is an infamously narcissistic generation with a ridiculous sense of entitlement. Some of us are grateful for our jobs -- I, for one, am grateful to have a safe, easy job as a janitor although if my responsibility were to clean and paint the bilges of a ship, I'd happily put on my Dickies and cover-alls and report for duty.  Most people my age would be disdainful of such work, because it's not high-profile enough.  I *am* angry that I can't seem to get any work with my degree, but at this point I'd take a job aligning semicolons if it meant I could get paid to spend time in Emacs.  I'd probably fall asleep at the keyboard, but that's just an excuse to drink more coffee.

It's weird to think of myself as a millennial, mostly because I have enough traditional skills from a pre-millennial age that I could get by fine without the glory of modern technology.  I can write -- poorly -- in cursive, and I often do as a way to gather my thoughts.  I can navigate a library's literal card catalog, although I haven't done so since I was a boy.  I could use a typewriter if the need arose, and I actually did use one occasionally when I worked for the University of Tennessee.  (You have no idea how easy it is to bang out a set of three or four file labels on a typewriter versus a laser printer.)  I can long-divide and long-multiply.  I was taught mathematics in an era when calculators were a luxury.  A commonplace luxury, but a luxury nonetheless.  Thus, my mental math skills are pretty good, and to this day I can still do simple calculus in my head, not to mention back-of-the-envelope calculations amenable to programming.  (Lemme see... four thousand users... at two gigs a pop... that's eight terabytes of storage... and they need to be able to download at a max of 16 Mbps... so that's 64 Gbps of bandwidth at max load... and sixteen thread pools can support 250 users each....)

But if you take a teenager and stick him in a college math class where calculators are forbidden (still, thankfully, a common occurrence), chances are he'll crap himself and tweet about it or bitch about it on Facebook.  I grew up in a day when the drone of dot-matrix printers was still fairly common, when the Internet was still an obscure research network, when social gaming meant buying a Link Cable, and when social networking meant going outside.  Graphing calculators were what you bought when you joined the workforce, and generally you were building fucking skyscrapers with them, not playing the million-and-first rendition of "solve the equation."

Then things began changing.  The Internet was commercialized in 1995, and just a few short years later it was the biggest buzzword of them all.  Ebay came around in 1995 as well, making it possible to buy and sell Kiss memorabilia at record pace.  Amazon went public in 1997, already the 800-pound gorilla in online retail.  Blogger and LiveJournal both started off in 1999, popularizing the blog format of online publishing.  What we now know as social network sites came around in the first full decade of the Web: MySpace was perhaps the first in 2003, followed by LinkedIn that same year and Facebook in 2004.  YouTube, making it possible to "broadcast yourself," started off in 2005 and just 22 months later, Google bought it.  Twitter, now as ubiquitous as Facebook, was late to the party in 2006.  What made blogging and social sites unique was the fact that users could contribute their own content without the oversight of traditional forums or message boards, and that they could do so more easily than with traditional static-HTML websites.

Wikis came about as soon as the Web hit critical mass, with the Ward Cunningham wiki coming online in 1995.  Nowadays, wikis are ubiquitous as much as social networks, because they allow site contributors to add content nearly effortlessly.

At first, the killer app of the web was the Perl implementation of the Common Gateway Interface, which most frequently worked with plain text, the most efficient means of storing information but also the dumbest.  Databases came about later, as they had been used for decades in enterprise computing but only then was commodity hardware powerful enough to run a true relational database. The close integration of a language called PHP to a database called MySQL and an HTTP server called Apache, all three running on the GNU/Linux operating system, gave rise to the now-ubiquitous LAMP server.  Linux, a free-software Unix-like system, in combination with commodity hardware and free-software languages and databases, gave us what we have today as the infrastructure that basically runs the Internet. There are Microsoft shops where ASP.NET rules the roost, and there are weirdoes who run PHP, MySQL, and Apache on Windows Server, and a few Apple shops where the head moron bought a handful of Xserves a few years ago, but most websites, including mine, run on Linux, Apache, MySQL, and PHP.  (Better languages like Ruby and Scala are gaining ground, and where performance is paramount so are NoSQL solutions.  Thankfully, XML databases seem to be an interesting and expensive footnote to the history of the Internet.)

But the technology wasn't created by idealistic millennials; instead, it was created by cynical Gen-X'ers and their optimistic Baby Boomer parents.  In the Unix world, Dennis Ritchie typified the boomer-era hacker with a luxurious Unix beard and a propensity to code in raw hexadecimal if the need arises; in that case, Linus Torvalds must represent the cynical Gen-X hacker who just wants to Get Shit Done™.  Linus would use those words, too.  (I mean, he didn't just create a kernel, but he participated in a project -- Git -- to create a source code manager to keep its sources in.)

No, idealistic millennials haven't actually done anything of circumstance.  Ok, so the Facebook logo is on basically everything you own now, but that wasn't one man's doing either, and even though he's a billionaire, Zuckerberg didn't even finish college.  (Not that that matters -- neither did Gates or Jobs, and they did all right.)

Stein ignores three things about us, though, with a fourth for good measure:

1.  Every pore in the economy through which you could walk in search of work closed up during the great recession.  The few jobs available to us are extremely competitive, so it's no major surprise that those of us looking for work are looking damn hard -- if we haven't given up and started working 80-hour weeks at a crappy chain restaurant.  In many fields, internships are now all but required but still hard as hell to come by.

2.  We're not all lazy, entitled social butterflies.  I, for one, am neither entitled nor a social butterfly.  (Am I lazy?  Hell yes.)  I don't have any great expectations of my first real job: all I want is a desk to sit at, a workstation to hack on, and a paycheck at the end of the pay period. Anything else is a luxury at this point.  I can't *afford*, in terms of my professional development, to be any other way.

3.  For as many of us as are lazy and useless, there are just as many of us who just want to bask in the presence of greatness, learning everything we possibly can as we go along and working our asses off along the way.  We'd do it for free if petrol, pizza, PBR, and coffee paid for themselves, but they don't, so we can't.

4.  To that end, I wouldn't ever dream of bitching to the CEO about my hugely boring workload, tempting as the thought may be, but if he (or she) ever barged into my office and said, "Ellison, I've picked you to randomly have a cup of joe with," you'd better believe I'd seize the opportunity and use it to learn every bit as much as I could about the chief officer's work and mission.  I have difficulty believing anyone *could* be that stupid.

Don't get me wrong.  Modern technology is great.  I for one don't know where I'd be without blogging.  (Probably more productive, happier, and better looking, but I digress.)  I love having the ability to use Twitter as a personal soapbox and memo pad for the Internet.  (That's why I tweet websites I like -- it's as much for me as it is for my followers.)  For that matter, I love having digital cable so I can watch the Americanized version of the Beeb.  (*Top Gear* is win.) But I also know how to operate a power drill, how to change my car's oil, and how to change a flat tire.  I can pump my brakes (my car lacks ABS), sauté shrimp, and I won't fall to pieces or need to order KFC if my folks are out of the house and it's dinner time.  And, as you can guess by reading this, I can configure a WordPress setup with the best of them and I could run the server, too, if I decided to tell DreamHost to shove it.  (I wouldn't think of that -- they've been good to me so far, and I've been with 'em for several years.)  I'm multilingual -- I've studied French since 2003 and I took Japanese in college. Okay, so blogging and conjugating verbs aren't as sexy a skill set as changing a flat tire or sautéing shrimp (both of which, incidentally, could save your date.)  The point stands, though: all of those skills help you get shit done.

But you take the average Millennial male and put him in an apartment and I guarantee he'll put on 15 pounds (from ordering takeout) and end up broke (since he can't even fix his own car, if he even has a car).  And if you plopped him on a construction site, you'd hear him whine the first time he had to pick up a 2x4, much less a sheet of plywood, and that's if he could even lift the plywood. (Your typical piece of 23/32" 4x8 subfloor weighs about 100 pounds.  It's unwieldy as all hell, but I can pick up a sheet and carry it.  Notice I didn't say *easily*.)  Not to mention that he'd leave missing a finger or two (due to operating various power tools incorrectly) or in a back brace (due to lifting incorrectly).  Most of all -- *that*'s if you could even *get* him to go to a construction site.  I'd venture to guess that most Millennials would shit themselves if you told them they had to work with a bunch of sweaty, swearing men, not to mention that they'd be afraid of messing up their hairstyles and their fashionable clothes.

And why would the personification of Generation T (for Twitter) be a sharply dressed young woman snapping a picture of herself with her iPhone?  I take
several issues with this:

* Not all Millennials are female.

* Not all Millennials are narcissistic.

* Not all Millennials are stupid enough to own iPhones.

* Not all Millennials, for that matter, can even *afford* a smartphone -- if they can afford a cell phone at all.  Never mind the phone - data isn't cheap, you know.

* Not all Millennials are sharply dressed.

I think the underlying message *Time* is trying to send is that women typify this generation because both men and women are acquiring more feminine traits. It's a slippery slope to the ranty territory of "men's rights" when I say that men need to stand up and be men, but dammit, *men need to stand up and be men!* Masculinity is not a trait for the working classes only!  And masculinity also isn't a bunch of men grunting and scratching their asses.  It's sad, and a testament to the time in which we live, that there is a website that exists solely to bring back the increasingly lost [art of manliness][1].  There are men out there who don't know how to be men, or who have misconceptions about what that really means.  That's a sad thing.  We're talking about men who can't tie a necktie, who can't fell a tree, who can't change their cars' oil, who can't even hang a picture without putting the hammer through the drywall.  This is a generation of people that has had things handed to it, that is so accustomed to convenience that they approach Homer Simpson levels of stupidity when it comes to things that don't offer a lot of convenience.

Of course, we are also talking about a generation of young people who wondered why they were being force-fed algebra and Western civilization in school, when polynomials and Louis XIV have no discernible importance to daily life -- except when they do.  Knowing about history and math makes a person well-rounded, just like knowing other languages can make you better at your native one.  An example: many English words have cognates in French.  The reverse of that is also true: many French words have cognates in English.  Knowing this is important because the set of "French words with cognates in English" expands your English vocabulary, while the set of "English words with cognates in French" expands your French vocabulary.  In French, for example, you say *améliorer* when you mean "improve," but it turns out that *améliorer* has the cognate "ameliorate" in English, which also means "to improve" except that its root is purely Latin, not Anglo-French like *improve* is.  Learning about this distinction between Germanic and Latinate vocabulary gives rise to two very distinct registers of speech in the English language: a less sophisticated register that favors Germanic words, and a more sophisticated register that favors Anglo-French, Greek, and Latin words.  Learning about this distinction allows the writer to tailor her work to her readers and to the occasion for which the work was written.  Not learning about it -- being shackled by ignorance -- hinders one's development as a writer.

But then we *are* talking about the generation trying to blend *its* and *it's* (don't get me started about *its'*).  It honestly makes me want to ask, "Were you dropped on your head as a child?"

Actually, a lot of things millennials do make me want to ask that question.

There's one last thing and this one really gripes my ass: of course we still live with our parents.  The alternative is *living on the fucking streets*.  I'd much rather put up with Mom and Dad than with Larry the Bum stealing my last fiver so he can go buy another bottle of Thunderbird. (No offense intended to any men or bums named Larry.  Sorry if I did offend.)

[1]: http://www.artofmanliness.com/
