---
layout: post
title: The Pomodoro Technique
mood: saucy
music: "Weird Al - &ldquo;Lasagna&rdquo;"
description: "I discuss using the Pomodoro technique."
---
_Pomodoro_ is Italian for _tomato_, and in that country tomatoes are a very common part of the cuisine.  Indeed, Italian cookery so venerates the tomato that kitchen timers are shaped like them.  Perhaps it was the shape of Francesco Cirillo's kitchen timer that motivated him to call his time management technique _Pomodoro_ as well, and when Cirillo began to publicize his methods, the method took off.  Erica Ho discusses the technique [at Lifehacker](http://lifehacker.com/5554725/the-pomodoro-technique-trains-your-brain-away-from-distractions), and Kevin Purdy [discusses it in fuller detail](http://lifehacker.com/5377906/the-pomodoro-technique-fights-deadline-anxiety-with-a-timer) at the same site.

Here at Route 38, however, I won't recapitulate the full details except to provide a brief summary of the technique:

0.  Pick something to accomplish and write it down.

1.  Set the timer to 25 minutes.  We call this interval _pomodoro_ after the tomato-shaped kitchen timer.

2.  Work on the task until the timer rings.

3.  When the timer rings, cross off the accomplished task if you finished, and pick it up at the next pomodoro if you don't.

4.  Take a brief break (about 5 minutes).

5.  Every four pomodori, take a longer break (about 15 minutes).

Now I love tomatoes in almost all their forms -- on hamburgers, in the form of ketchup, diced over pasta with olive oil and butter, the whole shebang.  I never thought I'd be applying that to time management, however.  Working in a 25-minute dash on one task -- _one_ task -- forces your brain to focus and in theory makes you more productive.  I've trialed the technique for today, and in seven pomodori -- the current one included -- I've moved posts out of draft status that lingered there for months, reconciled software changes from my virtual machine, and managed to find enough time to run out to the postbox and the bank.  (That took my entire break between sets of pomodori.)

Updating Route 38 via the pomodoro technique is one thing, however: doing real work with it is something else.  Some users of the method swear by it, and claim that their work lives are significantly better for using it.  Others think it's bullshit, that you don't need the specific and exact intervals for real work to be accomplished.  I strike a middle ground and contend three points:

0.  Working in controlled dashes on one task is most definitely beneficial to your health; it's a lot easier on the body and mind than trying to multitask.

1.  Taking frequent breaks is less taxing than taking one long break, and can help prevent repetitive stress injuries.

2.  Finally, using the technique properly -- regardless of the values you choose for the variables -- will help you realize productivity gains.

Canonical Pomodoro has you taking a 15- to 30-minute break every two hours.  If you work from 08:00 to 17:00, then it would be rewarding for you to come in at 07:45 so you can get your first break in and start your second block at exactly 10:00, finishing up at 12:00 just in time for lunch break.  Then you can repeat it at 12:45 when you finish lunch early, finishing your last pomodoro at 16:55 just in time to gather your things and leave work.

### But what about interruptions?

The scourge of productivity is the interruption.  Being interrupted drops you out of The Zone, and it's hard to get there to begin with.  When you are interrupted during a pomodoro, you have to abandon it and pick the work back up next time.  What's nice about this system is that if the interruption cannot wait, you can address it then and there -- if a customer calls saying their credit-card processing is down and they're losing money, you can put out that particular fire.

### You can't manage what you can't quantify!

I have never been particularly blessed with the ability to estimate how long things will take.  I never sat down and figured out just how productive I am in a given period, and that was a bad thing to do.  When you sit and work during a 25-minute long session, you realize just how much you can get done and just how easy -- or hard -- it is to do the thing you did.  If you resolve to write a program during a pomodoro, and it ends up taking three pomodori, either the problem was unforeseeably difficult or you underestimated how long it'd take.

The takeaway from working for, say, a work week under Pomodoro is that you can more accurately estimate how long it'll take for you to do various things.  It has taken me nearly an entire pomodoro for me to write this post up to now, as a simple example.  When you have this knowledge, you can go tell your manager, who'll either heave a sigh of relief or be grateful you have a way of counting your work progress, depending on the company where you work.  Or, if you are your own manager, you can more accurately bill clients, which both you and they will appreciate.

I'm looking forward to getting into my copy of _Getting Things Done_ and seeing if I can't hybridize GTD and Pomodoro as a means of being as productive as I can be.  (Leave it to a programmer to make things needlessly complex.)

Now if you'll excuse me, my pomodoro is about to go off and my pasta is al dente... _buona sera!_