---
layout: post
title: "The Labor Day Update"
type: update
image: "//files.tnwae.us/heroes/cowboys-datacenter.jpg"
---

It's Labor Day, which means that football season is upon us here in Big
Orange Country, and just around the corner in Broncos Country.  Among
the pertinent updates in my teensy corner of the world:

* I shaved my head.  Feels good man.

* I've been listening to a lot of Natalie Merchant lately.

* I'm in the process of switching from Google Play Music to Apple Music.

* I'm now volunteering at The Muse Knoxville, an interactive museum.
  They need office help and I like doing office work.

* I'm in the process of re-upping my Java skills and updating my resume.
  (Wish me luck as I re-enter the IT job search.)

* I'm getting ready to start a cycle of 8/6/3, Brad Kaczmarski's take on
  Jim Wendler's 5/3/1 periodization scheme for weight training.  This is
  a chance to see if 8/6/3 will be a good match for me, as I plan -- if
  it is -- on using it extensively.

* I've been playing a bunch of _Sonic Adventure_ lately, on the PC.
  Wonky camera angles and so-bad-it's-funny dialog aside, it's a very
  solid early 3D platformer and it takes me right back to late 1999,
  especially with the work of the brilliant modding community that has
  restored the Dreamcast version's appearance to the PC version.

* I nearly spat coffee across the room when I saw that the Broncos
  signed Brock Osweiler.  Someone help me understand, please!  WHY?
  (OK, he was serviceable in Manning's absence back in '15, and without
  Brock, there was no Super Bowl run in that season, though it helps
  when you've got DT and Emmanuel Sanders to throw to.  Still: WHY?)
  I'm equally confused by the cutting of T.J. Ward, but I wish him the
  best of luck in Tampa.

* The New York Yankees can go suck a lemon.  The Sox need to step it up,
  though, seriously.

Go Broncos, go Red Sox, and -- as always -- GBO.

