---
layout: post
title: "Breakout"
description: "Reducing the sheer volume of what comes through the tubes."
music: My own mental soundtrack of ignorant rubes ordering coffee-flavored drinkable candy
mood: Slow-dancing to a breakup song (ignorantly, and earnestly, contradictory)
category: "Administrative Crap"
image: "/art/heroes/desk.jpg"
---
We're going ahead backwards!  The future of vsdev.org is bound up
inextricably in its past, and its past is as a Jekyll site.  I'm kinda
sad to see the good times, brief though they were, come to an end with
WordPress.  (And I *almost* got through that with a straight face.)

WordPress is a fantastic piece of software.  I wouldn't say that unless
I actually felt that way, and I do.  It really is a swell program, but
the problem I personally have with WordPress is that it violates my
number-one rule of software:

**Do one thing, and do it well, to the exclusion of all other things.**

Jekyll does one thing, and does it well, to the exclusion of everything
else: it slurps up your content and templates and presses and forms it
into the form of a blog-structured website.  You feed it Markdown and
HTML, with the HTML gently decorated with Liquid template directives to
enable things like pagination (well, you also need a RubyGem for that,
but that's neither here nor there) and to include pieces into a larger
meta-template.  With the advantages of an external asset pipeline
(written in JavaScript and processed through the excellent
[Gulp][gulpjs] library, I'm able to have my cake and eat it too.

And because my Chromebook Pixel supports communication over Secure
Shell, I can keep my normal workflow -- after a fashion -- using
`screen` and the built-in SSH client (thanks, developer mode!) to edit
and generally work on my websites.  My smartphone's hotspot capability
lets me drag my workflow on the road, even to places without Wi-Fi.[^1]
I guess you could say AT&T is good for at least that one thing.  (Well,
that and those commercials with the rather comely Milana Vayntrub.)
Jekyll isn't quite 100% compliant with the Unix philosophy, mostly due
to its rather extensive requirements as regards external libraries, but
I consider Ruby to be the modern successor to Perl, which is the Unixest
language of them all (next to C), and Jekyll does obey the one part of
the Philosophy that says you should write programs to call external
utilities, even if you loosely interpret that to mean "calling through
an API rather than through shelling out."

Rather like a Windows user, I've subverted the parts of Jekyll that
don't work to my requirements, namely those pertaining to its alleged
asset pipeline.  It only works with Sass and CoffeeScript files; if
you're like me and wish to use a templating language for your HTML,
you're out of luck.  You're also out of luck, at least as far as I could
tell, if you wish to generate sourcemaps, which are more valuable to
debugging Sass and CoffeeScript than just about anything else out there.
I'm enjoying my rather blissful existence in a post-HTML, post-JS,
post-pure-CSS world, and it is a glorious thing, a beautiful monster of
tangled webs of requirements.  Granted, I look at most of webdev with a
jaundiced eye, and once I settled upon Sass (whitespace-significant
format preferred), Haml (again, significant whitespace), and
CoffeeScript (ditto!), I haven't had much interest in finding anything
better.  Pug looks *kinda* interesting, but (call me a loony if you
must) I prefer the percent signs on my HTML tags and the at-times
bewildering syntax of the Haml language.  (Also, pugs suck; spaniels are
clearly the superior breed of dog, though vsdev.org is firmly a cat
household.)  Less looks even less interesting than Sass (see what I did
there?), and because I'm pretty firmly a Ruby bigot (yes, vsdev.org is
also a Ruby household!), I wouldn't even give it a second thought.
(Hell, I'm considering moving my asset pipeline to pure Rake.  I did,
however, find the elegance of Gulp rather beguiling.)

If GNU Make had a watchdog provision as opposed to a mere build
mechanism, I swear upon all the gods I'd use Make instead of Rake and
Gulp to build and monitor the site while I hack on it.

One unrelated observation before I continue blogging: the sheer vapidity
of people never, ever, _ever_ ceases to amaze me.  I'm writing this at
Starbucks right now, and it always shows me how boring people really
are, and why I feel increasingly vindicated that I prefer machines in
all but the rarest of circumstances.  A good car, computer, camera, or
even the utilitarian elegance of a good backpack, is preferable to the
inherent boringness of most people.  And I really wish the teenagers
sitting two chairs down from me would either shut their fucking
cakeholes or move the hell on.  Their girlish giggling at gaggles of
godawful photographs (sorry to break your alliteration!) is enough to
gall the ever-loving shit out of me.  All Snapchat and its ilk have done
have enabled people to masquerade their vapidity as depth, trying their
damnedest to present a front of uniqueness and interestingness, all the
while only demonstrating their sheer amounts of verbal diarrhea.

Seriously, does "dude on a laptop, writing with the fury of twenty
Hemingways" scream anything OTHER than **THIS GUY IS WORKING, BETTER
SIDESTEP HIM AND LEAVE HIM BE**?  Fuck this gay earth, seriously.  Such
is life nowadays that politeness is mistaken for flirtation, and
manners, much like Windows 3.1 and the notion of Clintons in the White
House, are obsolete.  (I'm still gunning for a Sanders/Warren or
Warren/Sanders ticket for 2020.  Yes, I am more liberal than you.)

Anyway, you know you're a nerd when: the drum rhythm of a song at
Starbucks doesn't make you mourn for the future of popular music, but it
does serve to remind you of "Country Roads" by John Denver.

I really hate it when I slip into stream-of-consciousness blogging.  I'm
like the James Joyce of blogging at my best when I slip into that form
of "writing," but at my worst -- well, I'll spare you that comparison,
because it's gross.

The short of it here is that I'm moving to Jekyll effective as of this
post.  

[gulpjs]: http://gulpjs.com

[^1]: My operative assumption is that no place has public Wi-Fi, because I only trust one person to administrate a secure Wi-Fi access point, that person being me.  The idea of having my data intercepted in transit by an MITM attack will always scare the crap out of me.  If OpenBSD is the OS for the paranoid, then I guess you could say I'd be a perfect candidate for using it.

