---
layout: post
title: "The MLK Day Update"
type: update
image: "//files.tnwae.us/heroes/fenway.jpg"
---

Is it baseball season yet?

That's the only thing on my mind as I write this because I'm rooting for
the giant meteor as the NFL playoffs wind down.  I don't like the
Patriots, I don't like the Eagles, and I'm neutral-at-best with respect
to the Vikings and Jaguars.  I love the idea of a Vikes/Jags Super Bowl
because fuck the Pats and Eagles, but it probably won't happen.  (Now
you're thinking with Bortles, in the words of "Draw Play" Dave
Rappoccio.)  The good is that it's not all that long until pitchers and
catchers report.  The bad is that it's still a while until pitchers and
catchers report.

I've been shuffling things around in preparation for making the
ultimate upgrade to Denali, which is going to be in the form of a
dual-socket motherboard, specifically the SuperMicro X8DTL-iF.  The 'iF
was a reasonably common server board around the turn of the decade and
they're cheap (about $100) and abundant.  Most importantly, they support
up to 96 GB of RAM (in six slots, so you need those spendy 16 GB RDIMMs)
and up to twelve processor cores, meaning that using DAZ Studio should
be less painful even if my graphics board is only limited to an x8 link.
That's the only serious drawback to these boards, that you're limited to
an x8 PCIe link in the sole x16 slot.  Sagarmatha is back in action and
with a mobile Core i7 and 16 GB of RAM, it can handle most of Denali's
former workload, including Photoshop, webdev, and VirtualBox duties.
Studio is about the only thing it can't handle, and that's only due to
the lack of discrete graphics.  Even a P500 motherboard would only give
me 96 CUDA cores, and the only heatsink I could find for the P500 board
was available in Bulgaria.  Nothing against Bulgaria or her people, but
I don't want to order an apparently-rare part from more than 8,000 km
away.

Anyway, the X8DTL-iF is an ATX board, meaning that it will fit in my
current case without issue.  The board also comes with the ICH10R
southbridge, which supports hardware RAID 0/1/5/10 under Windows.  I'm
currently using exactly this southbridge on my current X58 board, so I'm
hopeful that I can move my current RAID array to the new board with a
minimum of fuss.  I'll cover the move over at [vsdev](//vsdev.org) as
soon as I'm able to place the order for the board and RDIMMs.
