---
layout: post
title: "Tales from the Interview 2: Let Her Cry"
category: Careers
---

In 2013, I was interviewing with a firm that provided software support
to a local chain of retail stores.  I’d have been doing C#/.NET
programming on their retail software.  Despite having about two weeks’
experience with C#, I had made it to the third round of interviews, and
what a glorious cluster it was.

Round 1: The phone screen.  The stakeholders seem pleased following my
ability to talk intelligently about C# despite only knowing Java.  (The
languages and their associated stacks are very similar in concept and
execution.)  After promising to cram as much C# into my skull as I can
over the following fortnight, an on-site interview is scheduled with the
promised two-week lead time.

Round 2: The technical round.  I’m handed a laptop connected to a
projector and asked to write code -- real code, with a real keyboard and
all -- for the tech lead and his subordinates to scrutinize.  My rough
understanding of math (I’ve never been terribly strong at math, mind
you) surfaces during some of the more math-heavy questions, but “he
kicked ass” is how the tech lead describes my programming ability.  I
advance to the third round.

Round 3: The round of unmitigated dread, then as now, aka the behavioral
round.  They decide that the best way to conduct this is to let me sit
in on a meeting, then to let the attendees of the meeting barrage me
with questions afterward.  I’m immediately annoyed with this process and
that becomes clear through my body language and tone of voice.  Any hope
I had of working here has disappeared faster than a fart in a hurricane,
but I quit caring at the point where the fifth person asked me, “Tell me
about yourself.”  Answering that question twice during an interview
should be considered a violation of the Geneva Convention, never mind
answering it at least nine times.

Twelve or thirteen people into this clusterf*ck, I’m confronted with my
last interviewer.  “Thank God,” I think to myself, “I can answer a few
questions from this lady, wrap this shitshow up, and then I can go pee,
and then I can get a Quarter Pounder and a cup of coffee!”

However, I can immediately tell that this woman has taken a dislike to
me.  Her body language, her tone of voice, her choice of questions --
she wants me to fail so that she doesn’t have to work with me.

Now fam, I’ll grant y’all that I probably wasn’t terribly pleasant to be
around at this point.

I’ve spent the past two hours running my mouth to a bunch of strangers.
That’s hell on earth if you’re an introvert.

I’m bursting for a pee.

I’m starving.

On top of it all, my coffee IV has run dry and I’m desperate for another
hit.

Being stuck with one of the wives of Atilla the Hun from a previous life
isn’t making anything any better.

And now, everything I’ve worked for is about to be chucked in the
garbage, wasting not only my time but that of about twenty other people
involved in or adjacent to the interview process.

I reach this conclusion when she starts barraging me with behavioral
questions designed to catch me off-guard (every single one of which had
already been asked of me multiple times, to my utter agitation).  I’m
tired of her bullshit, but what do I do, other than tough it out?  She
seems determined to make the process as difficult as she can muster
during the dying minutes of the interview process.  To this end, she
throws me a curveball so vile that I’m glad I never ended up sharing an
office with her:

“What would you do if I were crying?”

I don’t even remember what I said in response.

That’s the degree to which this ridiculous, irrelevant, and frankly
offensive question blindsided me.  Here’s the thing, folks: your
inability to regulate your emotions in the office is not my concern.  I
am not your therapist.  I am not a psychiatrist.  And I probably don’t
give half a shit why you’re in tears at work, unless it concerns me
directly (and before you interject, I’m keenly aware what an asshole
that makes me sound like).  Most importantly, just as in baseball,
[there’s no crying in computer science](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6-ZMO8jhbwg).

Some power-drunk twit with an ax to grind sunk my chances of getting a
job in a company where I probably would’ve fit in reasonably well had I
been given the chance, all because she personally didn’t like me.  I
still don’t know how to take that, aside from being thankful that I
never had to share a building with her.

Takeaways:

🚩 One bad experience can sour the entire interview process, so stay on
your A-game until that last interview is over and you’re in the car
after the fact.

🚩 Drawn-out interview processes where you speak to everyone who might
possibly hear you quietly humming “Do It Again” by Steely Dan while you
microwave your breakfast are not good for anyone: they take up the time
of the employees called into the interviews and they are overly
adversarial for the applicant.  (Spare me your “but my company is
different” bullshit: they are *always* overly adversarial for the
applicant, especially for the neurodivergent ones in the applicant
pool.)

🚩 When weird things happen to you, turn them into good stories.

🚩 Companies: don’t put applicants through Silicon Valley-style
interview gauntlets designed to break people’s wills (and admit that
your goal is to break people’s wills if you insist upon such a gauntlet
for your candidates).  You’re not a MANGA company and you have nothing
to gain by acting like one.

I have a personal rule as regards interviewing.  It’s actually a list of
rules and I insist that every one of them be followed to the letter.
Hey, if companies can have lengthy lists of requirements, then so can I.

1.  You will refer to me as “Mr. Ellison” or as “sir.”  We’re not on
    first names unless and until I accept an offer to work for you.

2.  I will go through no more than two interviews.  If, by the end of the
    second interview, you remain uncertain whether I would be a good fit for
    you, that is your issue, not mine.

3.  I will not, under any circumstances, attend a panel interview
    consisting of three or more interviewers.  There will be, including
    myself, no more than three people in the room or on the Zoom call.

4.  I am not a guest on _Jeopardy_, and neither are you Alex Trebek nor do
    you have his charm or wit, so I will not answer your trivia questions
    about minutiae of software engineering you have never needed to know in
    a professional capacity.

5.  I will not implement an algorithm on a whiteboard that you have never
    had to write for pay in your entire career.  If you remain in doubt
    about my mastery of computer science fundamentals after discussing
    programming with me, I don’t know what to tell you.

6.  If, however, you wish for me to take part in a code challenge, either
    furnish me with a laptop or don’t act shocked when I pull my own laptop
    out of my briefcase (or start a screen-sharing session on Zoom).

7.  I don’t do take-home programming challenges.  If you insist on my
    performing one:

    - You will be billed at my standard rate of $135/hour (with a minimum
      of 10 hours), payable upon receipt to my LLC, and you will sign a
      contract to this effect.

    - The code I write will be licensed under GPLv3 and I will sue you if
      you breach the terms of the license.

    - The technical interview will consist solely of a review of said code
      and any other questions/issues will be deemed out of scope and
      remain unanswered.

    - You will grant me the latitude to use the language/stack of my
      choice to implement a solution, since clearly it doesn’t need to fit
      into your existing system (hey, it’s just a proof of concept,
      right?).

9.  If you ask me a stupid question, expect a snarky response.

10. I will not open a code editor in a professional capacity for a cent
    less than $45.00/hour, no exceptions.  Offer me less and I will
    unconditionally reject your offer.  Money talks, bullshit walks.

11. If you are impolite to me, I reserve the right to be impolite in
    return, asshole.

