---
layout: post
title: Why Pivot?  Why Now?
---

I seem to have a hard time making people understand why I want to pivot from
medical billing to software development.  To be perfectly clear, I don't hate my
current job.  I went to school for it in 2018 and I maintain an active coding
certification so I can do my job better.  Medicine and the human body fascinate
me -- but I don't have the stomach or, honestly, the personality to be a
physician or a nurse.  Gather 'round, boys and girls, because it's Storytime
with William.

My journey of learning how to program began on January 10, 2007, the day after
my nineteenth birthday.  Over the next four years, I crammed everything I could
into my head concerning the subject of computer science, learning about Unix,
Turing machines, data structures, object orientation, algorithms, etc., along
the path to my bachelor's in computer science.

## The Hunt

I started applying for open roles even before I was out of college, and even in
2010, and even for entry-level roles and internships, I was turned away for a
combination of reasons, centering around my headstrong nature and lack of
experience.  My skills were never in doubt: one interviewer said, where he knew
that I could hear him, that I "kicked ass" at the technical portion of his
interview.  I didn't keep great records then, but between 2010 and 2015, I
estimate that I submitted somewhere in the neighborhood of 1,000 job
applications, was explicitly rejected more than 500 times, and got turned away
after at least 60 interview cycles.  The cycle of rejection after rejection,
even in interviews where I thought I did well, wore on my mental health and led
me to spiral into a deep depression.  I became deeply insecure about my
abilities as a technologist, and the self-doubt seeped into every pore of my
being.

I got turned away for personality test results.

I got turned away for lack of experience.

I got turned away for lack of knowledge.

I got turned away for my then-caustic personality.

I got turned away for, it seemed, no reason at all.

In any case, when the final rejection came and went, I felt like a part of
myself had died since nobody was willing to even hear me out as regarded my
desire to do technology for a living.  All I had to my resume was a couple of
summers as an office assistant at the university where I studied, a couple of
volunteer gigs, and a janitorial job with my family's office-cleaning business,
plus some now-embarrassing projects on my long-deleted GitHub page including
some code I wouldn't admit to having written, a crappy blog nobody read, and
various dilettantish stabs at the technology du jour, ranging from jQuery to
Ruby and from PHP to Java.  No matter what I did, no matter what I didn't do,
nobody seemed interested and I lacked the drive, force of will, whatever you
want to call it, to make them interested.

So, I left the industry that refused to grant me entry.  Without the resources,
monetary or otherwise, to open a business for myself, I spent the next couple of
years thinking.

## Meditation

Those of you reading this who've done physical work, or really any kind of
repetitive work, know how it can help you to focus on things.  In the buildings
I cleaned, I established enough of a rhythm that I could more or less work on
autopilot, listening to Pandora on my phone while I swept floors and emptied
garbage cans.  I insist, to this day, that nothing is quite as meditative as
vacuuming a large, carpeted room (except, perhaps, for mowing a large lawn with
a push mower).  They wouldn't recognize it as meditation in India, but there's
nothing quite like physical work to calm my mind down.

Perhaps my think-sessions led me to the wrong conclusion, but I came to the
conclusion that if tech didn't want me, then tech couldn't have me.  I started
looking for any job that looked like it might have a place for me: office
assistant, bookkeeping, anything to do with writing, even the odd system
administrator or tech support role if the requirements in the requisition
weren't too onerous.  I put out more than 60 applications in the back half of
2017 alone, hearing no responses.

I couldn't even find work as a simple office clerk.  Talk about demoralizing.

In early 2018, I was looking through the want ads, and the Knoxville area at
that time was experiencing a glut of openings for medical coders and other
healthcare revenue cycle professionals.  I had no idea what a medical coder even
was, but it seemed to be about as far away from computer science as I could
feasibly get without learning to play the guitar and busking in front of every
swanky restaurant in town.

There was one problem, and it came in the form of a familiar foe.

## Familiar Foes

We as job-seekers and career-changers often bemoan the experience paradox, where
one must earn experience in order to be deemed employable in a given field, but
one must first have said experience in order to earn a job to gain the
experience needed to enter a field.  Medical coding is no different from
software development in that regard, and it's understandable why in both cases:
a bad medical coder is costly to the practice where he codes from charts, while
a bad software developer is costly to the firm where he writes programs.

Usually, you solve this paradox by working as an intern or something similar.

Here in Tennessee, we have a system of 24 vocational schools, the Tennessee
Colleges of Applied Technology, and most Tennesseans are eligible to attend
these institutions free of charge through the state's TCAT Reconnect grant.  As
I found out for myself, even as a matriculant at a four-year university, my
status as a citizen of the state granted me access to this grant.  As it turns
out, one of TCAT-Knoxville's most popular programs is its diploma in Medical
Office Information Technology, where for five months you spend your days
learning everything you need to start your career in medical billing, coding, or
front-office administration.  The component of the course that sold me was its
requirement of a 25-day externship following completion of the classroom course.

As of today, I've been working for the company that hosted my externship for
more than three years.  UPA gave me a chance when no one else would, and I give
them so much of the credit for helping to turn my life around.

TCAT-Knoxville had its place in my life, and it accomplished its goal of getting
me into the workforce as a full-time, lunch-pail-carrying, 40-hour-a-week
employee.  The benefit to my mental health was immeasurable: my depression
lifted, I felt freer than I had in years, and I even bought myself a nearly-new
car as a sign of my progression in life (and because my old car got totaled in
an accident, but that's a story for another day).  I've been able to build a new
gaming PC and purchase two new laptops, as well as supporting myself and building
my credit profile, with what I make from working in medical billing.

## Going Viral (and not in a good way)

Then the pandemic started.  And with more free time than I knew what to do with,
I started revisiting old passions that had gone by the wayside during the years
immediately after college.  I began collecting video games.  I started watching
Star Trek.  I started reading more.  I learned basic Swahili (and proceeded to
forget most of what I learned).  I bought a cheap guitar and learned a couple of
songs.

I also heeded a call that I'd been ignoring.

There was a recall out on my car, a 2016 Volkswagen Jetta, regarding the nuts
and studs holding the intake manifold to the cylinder head.  I ended up getting
the car to the dealership in April of 2021 so they could swap the offending
parts, and in the interim I drank a couple cups of lousy dealership coffee and
sat down with my laptop.  With a couple hours of uninterrupted keyboard time, I
opened an Xterm window, browsed to my document archives, and unarchived a small
file: `src.tbz`. That contained the contents of my former source code directory,
with projects going back to right after I finished college.

I picked one, a rudimentary 3D rendering program written in C++ and pure OpenGL
(yuck!), and set about adding a new feature to it.  I don't even remember what
the feature was, just that it felt natural to be writing in C++ again, almost as
natural as breathing.  It was as though the field I had to which I had bidden
farewell five years prior had been waiting for me all this time, wondering where
on earth I'd been.

I decided to weigh my options.  Quitting my medical billing job to pursue a
full-time boot camp simply wasn't an option: I have bills to pay, after all, and
they won't pay themselves.  I looked around to see what the consensus was about
boot camps: were they an effective use of money and, more importantly, of time?
I also played around on Leetcode and was happy to see that my skills hadn't
atrophied beyond the point of uselessness, although it was utterly obvious that
I had a lot to learn, and relearn, before I'd be even remotely useful (even if
only from solely a technical perspective) on a software team.

Then I found Nucamp.

## Nucamp

Nucamp is a programming boot camp that emphasizes cost-friendliness and
flexibility for working adults.  You don't have to quit your job to be a
Nucamper, and you don't have to sell a kidney to afford the classes.  There's no
insidious income-sharing agreement, no selling your soul in part-exchange, none
of that sort of thing.  I didn't even have to get out of bed to reap the
benefits of their model of education: the courses were conducted online, with
people who have actual industry experience (as opposed to the ivory-tower
researchers at universities), in technologies immediately relevant to the
technical landscape of the 2020s.  Their bread and butter is their family of
courses designed to turn average everyday people into Web and mobile developers
by teaching them JavaScript, HTML, CSS, Bootstrap, React, Node, Express,
MongoDB, and React Native.

That's where my problem with Nucamp was.  JavaScript is not my favorite
programming language and never has been.  Web development has never been my
favorite subspecialty of software development, and having to start my career
there doesn't have me what you'd call terribly enthused.

When Nucamp announced a Python course in mid-2021, I felt almost like they were
targeting me directly.  I could take or leave Web development, to be honest:
systems-level stuff always interested me more in college.  But I had positive
memories with Ruby, a language very similar to Python, and when I reviewed the
course materials I felt like the course was the perfect fit for me as a comp sci
grad returning to the field after a long absence.

* Python, the language to know for data science (Pandas, Numpy, and Matplotlib)
  and machine learning (Scikit-learn, TensorFlow, etc.), and a popular choice in
  Web development as well

* PostgreSQL, the leading open-source object-oriented database middleware (with
  sharding and NoSQL support)

* The absolute basics of DevOps, including deployments to the three major cloud
  providers (AWS, GCP, and Azure) as well as basic CI/CD, Docker, Kubernetes,
  and the Agile paradigm.

Used prudently, Nucamp would allow me to refine my backend skills, learn an
interesting new language, finally get some proper instruction in databases, and
learn what all this serverless fuss is about.  Despite some kinks (I was a
member of the first cohort to take the course), I had no complaints, and I'm
sure that my lack of negative feedback (aside from some pacing issues later into
the course) was due in large part to my body of experience as a computer science
graduate.

What I didn't count on was falling head-over-heels for Python, meeting some
great classmates, and finding opportunities to practice my skills as a technical
explainer and the okayest software architect who ever lived.

However, now I'm faced with different questions.  Why do I want out of medical
billing?  Why do I want into software development?  How much could I really know
with an old computer science degree and "just" a boot camp certification?  Why
don't I have any leadership experience?  Why have I never run a project?  The
undercurrent of all of these questions is basically, "How do we know you're not
going to be a liability to our team, _outsider_?"  Facing gatekeeping from people
who should consider me a peer, who approach me so coldly and detachedly and then
wonder why I'm more nervous than a teenager on his first date, makes me wonder
why I don't stay in medical billing.

There's nowhere near as much gatekeeping in my current line of work.  If you can
pass the certification exams, you're good enough to do the work.  Lots of places
don't even insist on a college diploma unless you have your eye on a senior
leadership role, and oftentimes not even then.

I get it: every technical manager with more than a few miles on the clock has
been burned by some candidate who faked his way through the interview process,
got hired, and was about as useful as [Paula][0].  And I realize that to the average
technical manager, I'm no different to any other man on the street looking to
break into the industry.  That doesn't bother me.  Nobody owes me the benefit of
the doubt -- I should have to justify myself, to prove that I can do the work,
to prove that I can coexist with the remainder of a team.  I had to do those
things to get to where I am in my career in medical billing, so I'm fully aware
of the necessity of paying those dues in a new industry, or even in a new role
in the same industry.

All I want is a chance to pay my dues, to go through the process, to take my
skills, expertise, and perspectives and parlay those into a career doing
software.  All I want is the chance to explain myself, without fear of judgment,
and an opportunity to prove that the skills I claim on my resume are skills I
actually can exercise in a live setting, not just window dressing put there to
beat the ATS.

I love to program.  It's as simple as that.  I enjoy the challenge of turning
someone's thoughts into a series of commands that, when executed, do the thing
that was set out to be done.  I love to debug, to document, to sit down and do
nothing but implement.  Seeing the result of my work brings me untold happiness
now just like it did the first time I wrote a hello-world program in C++ fifteen
years ago.  Executing code I've written for the first time, and watching it
work, still brings the same joy it did the first time.

I want to turn the joy I feel in bending the computer to my will into a paying
job that will bring me untold satisfaction as a technologist and as a maker of
things.

That's why I want to be a software developer.

[0]: https://thedailywtf.com/articles/the_brillant_paula_bean
