---
layout: post
title: "Tales from the Interview, Part 3: The Ratio is Too Damn High"
category: Careers
---

It’s late 2013, and I’ve been contacted by a recruiter.  (Jeff, if you
ever happen to read this, I owe you, like, an entire case of beer.
Seriously, dude, you worked your ass off on my behalf.)  He’s got a
placement for me in an outlying town with a manufacturer of automotive
parts, specifically powertrain components (clutches, torque converters,
things like that).  I’ve always been a car nut, so just getting to see
inside the factory is going to be a treat.

I interview with the IT guy (who emphatically declares that he isn’t a
programmer, but he “plays one well on TV,” as it were), and he explains
that I’d be responsible for maintaining the software that orchestrates
the operations of the factory floor.  My interest has been piqued,
without me realizing (at the time) how unbelievably high-stress such a
job would be, especially delta seconds later when the truth of the
situation is unveiled.  When I ask about my prospective team, he tells
me, “There isn’t one.  You’re going to be the only programmer.”  Five
hundred people worked in the factory at that time.  (Cue the Wilhelm
scream.)

And I’d be the only programmer supporting software that ran equipment
responsible for millions of dollars in production per day.  Oh, and I’d
be on-call in case a server crapped itself at 03:00.

No pressure.  None at all.  (Also, I’m being the most sarcastic I’ve
been in a very long time.)  Lauri and Anni at the “Hydraulic Press
Channel” on YouTube might be able to show you, visually, how much
pressure I’d have been under.

They extended me an offer, incredibly enough.  $50,000.00 per year
looked pretty good on paper in 2013, I have to admit, especially for
somebody with no experience.  Fool that I was, I accepted the offer,
signing and faxing back the offer letter.  As far as I was concerned,
$50,000 is greater than $0, experience is experience, and I had heard,
even then, that once a software engineer gets their first job, the
second and subsequent jobs are way easier to get.  So, in my mind, I’d
have been a moron not to accept the offer.

There’s a dimension to this that I’ve neglected to mention until now,
and it’s the reason why the offer was rescinded in the eleventh hour.

I didn’t even get to tell them that it was OK to run a background check
on me, since they decided my unfitness for the position based on the
outcome of a personality test.

In the aftermath, I had to tally everything up, as I always do, and
here’s the calculus I perceive as regards this situation: I could have
gotten a year of experience and moved on, but that kind of environment,
coupled with my poor tolerance of stress, would’ve resulted in me going
to the hospital before I got the chance to resign.  Having an aneurysm,
heart attack, stroke, or other health calamity isn’t a risk I’m
comfortable taking just to break into an industry.

Still, having this offer yanked away from me stole what little
confidence I had left, and I sank into a deep depression.  I stayed away
from technology for most of the next seven years, instead focusing on
the cleaning industry, photography, and healthcare.

I’m still salty that I didn’t get a tour of the factory floor.

Takeaways:

🚩 At 500:1, the non-programmer-to-programmer ratio is too damn high.

🚩 I’mma need more than $50k per year (even in 2013 dollars) to be
on-call.

🚩 I’m not going to be the source of all the good bits starting out, and
the code I wrote in 2013 was an atrocity.  Any company foolhardy enough
to trust all of its code to a junior developer and an IT guy who
masquerades as a programmer deserves to have that code break in majestic
ways.

This interview’s outcome set the stage for everything that followed.  My
mid-to-late twenties were not a positive time in my life.  I lost the
plot, and I had to find it again on my own.  However, I wouldn’t be
where I am, with the perspective I have today, had things not ended the
way they did.

