---
layout: post
title: "Tales from the Interview 2½: I'm Worthy and I Know It"
category: Careers
---

I had an interview last year with a firm that makes healthcare software.
I was interested since my current gig in healthcare has allowed me to
explore my interest in medicine in a way that’s 100% less likely to see
me cutting people open or dealing with excrement.  Getting to combine my
interests and skills in software development and medical billing, then,
sounds like a no-brainer, right?

After an easy phone screen, I get brought on-site for the in-person
interview.  They bring me in and stick me in a conference room with the
IT generalist and the on-staff programmer (yes, just the one).  I’m
going to be responsible for helping him (the programmer, that is)
maintain a rat’s nest of code written in multiple different languages
with strata going back more than 35 years, and it’s all written to a
custom database backend that was written years before relational
databases were mainstream.  This is every technological red flag in
existence, being waved in front of my face simultaneously by a team of
red-jumpsuited redheads, and yet instead of being horrified, I’m
intrigued, and I make that clear to the technical people.  After the
fact, like all good Southern boys, I tell my momma about what happened.

Y’all should know that my mom is my best friend.  I tell her just about
everything, and the outcome of this interview is no different.  She’s
been my loudest cheerleader and strongest advocate for all of my 34
years, and discussing this interview with her was no different.  My
mom’s a smart lady, but more than intelligent, she is wise, and as I get
older, I value her wisdom more than her outright intelligence.  She
seems to agree, in this particular circumstance, that if I’m called back
with an offer, that I should take it, that this seems like a good
opportunity.  So I sit and I wait, and I wait and I sit, and eventually,
I get an offer.

For $36,000 per year.

Less than half of what my skills should command in Knoxville according
to Glassdoor, even with no relevant experience.

I have a degree in computer science.

A medical coding diploma.

A medical coding certification.

Three programming certifications (and I’m working on two more).

Three years of experience in the industry to which this firm supplies
software.

And I’m ready, willing, and able to dive into the rat’s nest of
spaghetti they have the unmitigated gall to call “code,” and even to
chain myself to the proprietary “database” they should’ve thrown out
when Bill Clinton rose to the presidency.  This is despite knowing in
the back of my mind that doing either of these things would be
considered career suicide.

And they can’t (or won’t) even pay me more than what I’m making as
someone who would use their software.

Could I have negotiated?  Sure; there’s no law on the books that says I
couldn’t have.

Would I have gotten what I wanted?  Probably not.

There’s another layer to this story, though: I didn’t want to negotiate
the offer, and not because of my distaste for negotiation (although
let’s get real folks, I’d rather take a kick to the groin than
negotiate on most things).

The offer I got was so low it actually insulted me.

And no, I’m not going to overlook that feeling of insult just to grant
legitimacy to an offer that, prima facie, has no legitimacy whatsoever.
I won’t develop software professionally for a cent less than
$45.00/hour; offering me just over a third of that makes a mockery of
both the field and my value as a professional.

So, I’m still looking, and I’m still learning.  And now, I insist on my
worth, my full worth, and nothing less than my full worth.

