---
layout: post
title: "Looking Back: Where My Love of Tech Began"
---

I commonly joke that I was born with a keyboard in one hand and a mouse
in the other, because my love of technology has been a lifelong kind of
thing.  I’m working on this whole “finding my voice” business, and
talking about my formative years is a key part of that, if only because
I enjoy telling people about that time in my life but rarely get the
chance.  I’m going to look at four specific machines and the role they
played in my life.<br><br>Fittingly, three of them are Macs.



## Mamaw’s 286

Later in my childhood, my late grandmother (on my Dad’s side; I called
her Mamaw to disambiguate her from Granny, my grandmother on my Mom’s
side) had gotten a 286 PC from a friend of hers.  It ran MS-DOS 5.0 and
came with a box of floppies, an old laser printer, and what I assume to
be an EGA monitor.  When Mamaw would watch me on the weekends, I would
play around with the thing, playing what few games were in the box of
5-1/4” floppies (there was one very good one where you flew a spaceship
into a narrowing pathway, and I seem to remember a roguelike as well)
and writing in WordPerfect 5.1.  That computer was the first one I ever
programmed, for it featured Microsoft’s QBasic programming language, a
dialect of BASIC close enough to that featured in some old computer
books Mamaw had given me.  (On reflection the BASIC dialect in those
books was most likely for a home micro of the early ‘80s or late ‘70s,
e.g. Apple II or TRS-80.  I’d remember if the books covered the
Commodore 64 or IBM compatibles.)

I didn’t fully understand or appreciate what I was doing by keying in
the programs from those books (and I couldn’t type very fast as a child,
making it tiresome -- _you_ try hunt-and-peck typing with tiny kid hands
on an old buckling-spring keyboard), but it established, even if only
deep in my subconscious, my desire to master the programming arts.  It
took years before I was able to get a computer of my own and by then, I
was busy with working on getting into college -- and as a teenager
obsessed with writing and language, programming wasn’t exactly
front-of-mind.

If I could go back in time, I’d compel nine-year-old me to learn how to
touch-type.



## Macintosh LC 575

It’s the mid-90s, around the time when Apple began its transition from
Motorola 680x0 to IBM/Motorola PowerPC processors.  I’m in the second
grade and I’ve taken to the classroom’s Macintosh workstations like a
duck to swimming.  My mastery of the medium is enough that I’m soon
helping my classmates work their own way around System 7 and the various
educational programs we used, and at the end of the school year, I’m
given the “Computer Wizard” award for my efforts.  From there began a
lifetime of helping people with their computer issues, something I do
even in my current job as a medical AR and claim appeals rep (read:
professional arguer).  Over the years, I’ve troubleshooted,
disassembled, reassembled, repaired, and generally mucked around with a
shockingly high number of PCs and Macs for someone who’s never done tech
support or break/fix for a living.  By my estimation, I’ve worked on or
in more than 50 computers, across volunteering jobs, my own machines,
and those of my family and friends, across all of the major brands.  I
first disassembled a computer when I was ten years old, but sadly I
couldn’t find a power supply to test the thing with when I got it back
together.  Unless I’m expressly disassembling a computer with no intent
of putting it back together, I don’t leave many carcasses around -- when
I take one apart, it works when I get it back together.

The LC 575 also sold me on being a Mac user.  I guess Apple’s most
insidious advertising tactic (placing them in schools in the name of
convincing kids to buy Macs later in life) worked on me, because I’ve
owned more than a dozen Macs over the last 15 years, from all periods of
the company’s history.  (The oldest one I own, a Macintosh Classic from
1990, is in need of some TLC.  If you or anyone you know happens to have
a Mac Classic motherboard on hand, email me or DM me on LinkedIn.  No
reasonable offer will be refused.  And if you or anyone you know has a
graphite G4 tower from the early 2000s, email me or DM me on LinkedIn,
because I’ve got wicked nostalgia for those things.  Again, no
reasonable offer will be refused.)



## White Plastic Goddamn MacBook

Fast-forward again to age 19.  I’m not as young, or as cute, in my first
year of college as I was in the second grade, but my dreams are no less
grandiose: in 2007, my new year’s resolution is to learn, once and for
all, the art of computer programming.  That’s where I like to tell
people my journey really began.  I had a white plastic MacBook, a C++
textbook, and the simple dream of learning how to program.  I was
enrolled in my university’s computer science intake course, and I fell
in love with the discipline from my very first cout statement.

Thousands of hours later, in May 2011, I earned my bachelor’s in
computer science from the University of Tennessee.  Fate intervened and
kept me from a job in the industry, and the reasons why are (mostly) out
of scope.  But I’m back, and while it’s definitely frustrating that the
job market is so heavy with talent (but so meager with jobs) right now,
I think I’m in the best place I’ve ever been as a technologist.  The
community has never been so supportive as it is now, companies never so
willing as they are now to give people a shot regardless of what their
career trajectory looks like - if you can get your story in front of the
right eyeballs.



## M1 Pro MacBook Pro

I can’t help but feel like my place is at the table, slinging code with
the best of them.  Like I said when I started this series of posts a
couple weeks ago, I’m not actively seeking an opportunity right now.
(Unless it’s an opportunity to run my mouth.  I’ll never turn down an
opportunity to do that.)  I’m working on myself in several different
ways.  Instrumental to that work is my newest laptop, a 2021 MacBook
Pro.  It has an amazing high-density screen, a sound system rivaling my
hifi in quality, and the fastest processor I’ve ever used in any
computer, ever.

I’ll delve into the specifics of how I’m doing that, and how I’m
tracking it, in a future post.

