---
layout: post
title: "Tales from the Interview Part 6: Never Trust a Fart - or a Network Contact"
category: Careers
---

I put out a (now-deleted) post in January looking for someone to simply
acknowledge me in my search for a job in the software industry.   An
acquaintance of mine answered the call and said he’d get me an interview
at his firm, and so kicked off a pretty standard interview process.  He
seemed pretty jazzed by my potential more so than my past, and I thought
to myself, “Self, you’ve finally done it.  You’ve finally found someone
who sees you for what you can be, not what you are now or what you used
to be.”  I was nervous as all hell during the system design interviews,
since that’s not an area I’m horribly knowledgeable about, but everyone
I talked to seemed reasonably excited, to such an extent that I made it
through four rounds of interviewing.

The fourth round concluded more than two months ago, and since then,
I’ve heard absolutely nothing.  I’m not the type to send a nudge message
to anyone since I’m of the opinion that that gets you tossed onto the
‘no, and please never apply again kthxbai’ pile faster than saying, ‘I
love sleeping at work.’  (I do not, in fact, love to sleep at work, just
for the record.  Having said that, I’d love to have been the marketing
guy who came up with the slogan, “All we do is sleep,” used by a local
sleep doctor.  That’s absolute gold.)  Granted, the fourth round of
interviewing went about as smoothly as 40-grit sandpaper, since during
the fourth round my inexperience was made blindingly apparent, but even
then they seemed pretty jazzed and hungry to move forward.

If I were just some random dude off the street I’d almost understand,
but I’d still be upset: being ghosted after four rounds of interviews is
extremely unprofessional and speaks to how it must be like to work
there.  But as a warm lead, referred to the firm by a member of the
company’s senior management, it stings all the more, and it genuinely
makes me wonder how they’ve managed to keep growing for so long, unless
those are marketing numbers designed to impress gullible idiots like me
(and my business knowledge is limited enough that I could truly be
considered a gullible idiot in that realm).

Takeaways:

🚩 You were referred by someone you know, someone who was willing to
vouch for you.  Don’t break your arm patting yourself on the back.
You’re still out there in the open and there’s a flock of pigeons with
diarrhea flying overhead -- and you’ve misplaced your umbrella.  The
referral you received means somewhere between jack and crap unless and
until you prove yourself to the people who have the hiring authority.

🚩 If you’re willing to refer someone for a role, get a sharper idea of
what you’re looking for from that role, and make it more obvious earlier
on in the process that there’s an impedance mismatch between the guy,
gal, or NB pal who’s asking you to refer them and what the company
really needs from that open role.  You’ll save a lot of people a lot of
time and frustration.

🚩 At least have the decency to tell your applicant that you’ve closed
the requisition, hired someone else, or frozen the position.  I wouldn’t
expect this after a first or second interview, but I feel like I have
the right to know for certain that I wasn’t picked after more than that.
More to the point, I feel like the company has the obligation to tell
me, since not only was my time wasted but so was that of five other
people (including senior managers, junior managers, and a software
developer who had to call in from overseas).

